---
layout: post
title: No option
date: 2006-10-10 01:00
tags:
- holiness
- faith
---
It is not an option. It is not something we can opt to do one day, and neglect the next. It is not a requirement to be fulfilled at our leisure, nor is it a choice we make.

Holiness is not an option.

Most Christians live with the awareness of the sinful state that humanity exists in. And they know that it is only the grace given through the blood of Jesus that we can live free from the bondage of sin. Through that grace we have been saved and given the promise of eternal life (Eph. 2:8-9, Phil. 3:20-21). But it does not end there.

It would be very easy to take too much comfort in the security of grace and head off to lead a life entirely dissonant with the promises given to us. That’s why our response to the grace offered us is not an option. God calls us to be holy, because He is holy (I Pet. 1:16). We need to mold to the character of Christ, who was the perfect example of pure holiness dwelling in man.

Our sin is great, and it is easy to get caught up in the guilt that comes from our inability to stop sinning. This is a trap I often fall into, and then as I deal with the feelings of despair, I feel like there is no way I can live up to the calling to be holy. And I can't. But that is no excuse not to aim for it, because holiness is not an option.

Jerry Bridges, author of *The Pursuit of Holiness*, writes that at times when we feel like we are drowning in sin, it is often Satan working in our hearts to convince us of our inability to be holy. This, though, is when we are to cry out to God for His strength and the working of His Spirit, the Holy Spirit, in our hearts. The path to holiness and identifying with Jesus' perfect model of holiness begins with the recognition of how far we fall short. Our faith should spring forth a natural desire to be more Christ-like.

Bridges suggests one helpful tool to begin our journey on the path to holiness. Anytime we do anything---a physical act, a thought, a word spoken---whatever we do, we must ask ourselves first if what we are doing is pleasing to God. It's a simple question to ask, but once you start practicing it, you realize how many roadblocks you run into.

To attain the holiness of Christ is an impossible goal in this lifetime, and for that reason may be a major detterent in striving to be holy. But it doesn't have to be. The ultimate purpose of our holiness is to give glory to God. It is not something that can be accomplished right from the beginning, but it is a journey. We follow the road seeking the help of the Spirit, growing in faithfulness and obedience to God, conforming to His will. Of course we will never attain perfect holiness. Yes, we must strive for it, but it will not be achieved in this lifetime. Nor does it have to be.

That's why we have Jesus.
