---
layout: post
title: Global cities and global mission
date: 05 March 2008 04:34
tags:
- church
- faith
- culture
- cities
- pitirim-sorokin
- religion
- christianity
- mission
---
<p><a href="http://www.lboro.ac.uk/">Loughborough University</a> in England has been credited with coining the term "<span style="font-weight: bold;">global city</span>."  The <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_city">Wikipedia article on the subject</a> defines a global city as "a city deemed to be an important node point in the global economic system...the linkages binding a city have a direct and tangible effect on global affairs through more than socio-economic means, with influence in terms of culture, or politics."  More specifically, a global city will usually have the following characteristics (which I've paraphrased from the Wikipedia article):</p>
<blockquote><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; International, first-name familiarity; whereby a city is recognized without the need for a political subdivision---for example, "Paris" instead of "Paris, France."</span><br /><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; Active influence on and participation in international events and world affairs, such as New York City and being home to the United Nations.</span><br /><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; A fairly large population (the center of a metropolitan area with a population of at least one million, typically several million).</span><br /><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; A major international airport that serves as an established hub for several international airlines.</span><br /><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; An advanced transportation system that includes several freeways and/or a large mass transit network offering multiple modes of transportation (rapid transit, light rail, regional rail, ferry, or bus).</span><br /><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; In the West, several international cultures and communities. In other parts of the world, cities which attract large foreign businesses and related expatriate communities.</span><br /><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; International financial institutions, law firms, corporate headquarters, international conglomerates, and stock exchanges that have influence over the world economy.</span><br /><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; An advanced communications infrastructure on which modern trans-national corporations rely, such as fiberoptics, Wi-Fi networks, cellular phone services, and other high-speed lines of communications.</span><br /><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; World-renowned cultural institutions, such as museums and universities.</span><br /><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; A lively cultural scene (film, music, theater, orchestra, and so on).</span><br /><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; Several powerful and influential media outlets with an international reach.</span><br /><span style="color: #5d5d5d;">&bull; A strong sporting community, including major sports facilities, home teams in major league sports, and the ability and historical experience to host international sporting events.</span></blockquote>
<p>The Wikipedia article lists a large number of cities which fit (or almost fit) these criterion, including cities one would expect in a list such as this---London, New York, Paris, Chicago, Tokyo, Toronto, Z&uuml;rich, Frankfurt, Moscow, and many more.</p>
<p>The reason that I am thinking and writing about this idea of a global city is because I think it is very important to the Church.  Despite the resistance of the idea that religious faith is the foundation of culture here in the West, the fact remains that it is.  What is true is that the faith at the heart of our Western culture is <span style="font-style: italic;">not</span> Christianity, but it is still a faith.  Call it secularism, or whatever you want to, but it is still religious at the core.  This theory has been supported by the English historian, <a style="font-weight: bold;" href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arnold_J._Toynbee">Arnold J. Toynbee</a>, who engaged in a study of twenty-three of the great civilizations of the past, and discovered that at the heart of each and every culture were religious impulses and teachings.  To assume that the West now is the first society not founded with a religious root is unrealistic and na&iuml;ve.  As a result, and maybe I am just slow in realizing this, it is essential that the Church targets these cities and engages in extensive efforts to make the gospel present in these strategic communities.</p>
<p>Sometimes discussions that focus on the strategy of the Church's mission can make it seem more like a business than a calling, but I think these discussions are still important, especially as the West faces the potential of a decline.  I have been taking a class dealing with the cultural issues in the West through the perception of <a style="font-weight: bold;" href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pitirim_A._Sorokin">Pitirim Sorokin</a>, who argues that the West has moved away from being a contractual society, where society agrees (or covenants) together to live according to various norms, ethics, and laws; to a much more individualistic and dictatorial society.  Therein, Sorokin argues, lies the breakdown of the West.</p>
<p>Sorokin maintains that the survival of the West entails a reclamation of this religious root, particularly of Christianity.  I am not arguing for a revival of Christendom or a theocracy.  What I think we do need, however, is to renew the contractual society based on the foundation of Christianity.  With the increasing degree of global connectedness, targeting the global cities with the mission Christ has entrusted to us continues to become more and more important.  Influential as these cities are, it would seem that if the faith were to take root there again, it would spread into other cities as well.</p>
<p>I have been speaking largely about the West, even though the idea of global cities is not restricted to the West.  So what about other cultures?  I am not particularly well-versed in the cultures of the East, but one thing I do know is that Christianity is cross-cultural.  It is not limited to a specific culture or context.  This is evident in the rapid growth of Christianity in Africa and Asia (countries such as China and South Korea).  Given the subsequent rapid increase of global significance and influence of countries such as China, the increasing presence of Christianity there will likely (and hopefully) play a major role and make a distinctive mark on this world.</p>

Of course, it should be clear that the mission of the Church is not restricted to these global cities.  Nor should it be assumed that the mission of the Church is more important now than it was in times past with the prospective decline of the West.  One thing that is clear, however, is that a great opportunity awaits us as our culture searches in vain for something to fill the void which it constantly struggles with.  The ever-increasing importance and influence of the global cities makes the need more apparent.  The onus is on us to be the light of the world (<a href="http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=matt.%205:14-16&amp;version=31">Matt. 5:14-16</a>).  This is our task, our calling, our mission.  This is why we are here.
