---
layout: post
title: More considerations on the local church and community
date: 23 October 2008 04:48
tags:
- church
- community
- culture
- ecclesiology
- local-church
- martin-luther
- theology
---
<p><a href="http://www.mattcleaver.com/">Matt Cleaver</a> has a great post today which he has titled "<a href="http://mattcleaver.com/2008/10/22/a-theology-of-geography-locality-and-proximity/">A Theology of Geography: Locality and Proximity</a>," which, I must say, sounds a lot more like the title of a book than a blog post. Matt's reflection is based on this quote about vocation that he draws from <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Luther">Martin Luther</a>: "The call to follow Christ leads not to any religious vocation removed from daily life, but instead it transforms the attitude and understanding one has of the situation in which one already is."</p>
<p>Narrowing in on the last clause of that statement, "the situation in which one already is," Matt looks past the occupational, marital, or social situations we find ourselves in, and adds the concept of geographical situation in understanding our calling, thereby entering into a discussion of a certain element of ecclesiology my readers know I have an affinity for--the local church. The vocation and calling of the Christian as a member of the Church needs to be understood in part in the local sense, Matt argues. Wondering if there are many people who have thought about vocation as something that encompasses all of life, Matt muses over "how many have taught, and more importantly lived, vocation as living out your faith literally <span style="font-style: italic;">where you are located</span>."</p>
<p>I want to reproduce in their entirety Matt's suggestions for what we would perhaps see if our churches radically recaptured this notion of the local church. His suggestions bear consideration. Here is what he has to say:</p>

<blockquote>
<ul>
<li><strong>Churches would be smaller</strong>. This is the most obvious observation. If churches are within walking distance, people aren&rsquo;t going to want to go far, so churches would have to be pretty small. Maybe they wouldn&rsquo;t even need a building in some cases.</li>
<li><strong>No need for parking lots, or just very small ones</strong>. Think of the money spent to buy land and then pave over that land so people don&rsquo;t have to drive their cars and walk through the mud. No need for that when people walk to church.</li>
<li><strong>Denominationalism would die&hellip; faster</strong>. Postmodernity seems to be bringing about the death of denominations already, but valuing close proximity would speed that process. If churches&rsquo; allegiance was to a particular locale they would be less able to cater to their own denominational supporters. In Texas there are likely only a handful of Lutherans within walking distance of existing churches. Baptists are another story. Churches would be defined by shared mission, not shared denominational subscription (or tradition).</li>
<li><strong>The church would embody a counter-cultural practice that highlighted holistic living</strong>. Most of us live in a culture that lives, works, worships, and shops in different geographic locales. As such, our lives become disjointed and fragmented. To do all these things in the same basic geographic area would help us to integrate ourselves into the lives of people, rather than just their functions because we would see the same people over and over again in different life situations. We would become aware of local issues of crime, taxes, education, politics that affected the whole congregation, not just certain segments. If people were trained to gather and worship in places close to their homes, I suspect they would begin to look for ways to live out other aspects of their lives in a similar manner.</li>
<li>T<strong>he church would embody a counter-church-culture practice of environmental stewardship</strong>. Think about how much gas is spent by people driving to churches multiple times a week. Especially when gas prices were skyrocketing, this was beginning to become an issue because of the financial implications. Regardless of cost, it is still a theological issue of stewardship. Should Christians be consuming so much driving back and forth to church?</li>
<li><strong>Community would be formed</strong>. Children would attend the same schools, parents would shop in the same grocery stores, and families would play at the same parks. Families would be available to pick up other people&rsquo;s children from school, babysit on short notice, help repair a leaky faucet, and a whole host of other everyday tasks because the lived just minutes away from each other. I believe many people in our congregation are willing to help one another, but it becomes difficult when round trips to other people&rsquo;s homes eat up 30 minutes or more.</li>
<li><strong>Mission would become local again</strong>. Churches could become the centerpieces of social life in communities because they would be in tune with and attentive to the needs of the local community. In areas where after school programs were lacking, churches could step in. Where there was a high concentration of elderly people, churches could provide needed services. If systemic poverty was an issue, churches could provide occupational skills training. Each church would find its mission because they were situated in a particular geographical context. The needs of the church would by definition be the needs of the local community. Churches would become known as positive change agents in communities again.</li>
<li><strong>Taxes would go down</strong>. My contention is that the government does a lot of tasks and provides a lot of services that could (or should?) be provided by churches. If churches live out their mission in their local contexts as described above, then the less government needs to fill in the gap. Okay, well, taxes might not go down, but maybe they would not go up.</li>
<li><strong>Youth and children would not be bound by their ability to find a ride to church</strong>. As someone in youth ministry, many things are significantly hindered because almost everything requires getting in a car and driving, even if activities are hosted at someone&rsquo;s house and not the church building. If a church is within walking distance, kids as young as elementary age would be able to walk to church or one another&rsquo;s house at almost any time.</li>
</ul>
</blockquote>

<p>Although some of my considerations might be slightly different, I do agree with many of Matt's sentiments here. There are significant hindrances to the Church fulfilling her mission in its entirety when the body of a local church is composed of people who live many miles away from that church in different communities, towns, and cities. In saying this, I must confess that I am one of those people--my drive to church on Sunday takes about twenty minutes. However, I have long struggled with this and have often thought about how things would be different if I lived significantly closer. Listening to a message once from <a href="http://www.sovereigngracestore.com/ProductInfo.aspx?productid=A1220-00-21">the series on ecclesiology</a> put out by <a href="http://www.sovereigngraceministries.org/">Sovereign Grace Ministries</a>, I remember being challenged by <a href="http://www.joshharris.com/">Joshua Harris</a> who made the point that when we move to a new city, perhaps we should first find a church community to worship with and then go out and find a job and place to live. What I find so poignant about Harris' statement is that, in doing so, we actively live with the Church at the center of our lives and our community. It seems to me that in doing this, we are starting to work towards recapturing the Church's mission and our calling, and we are fostering <a href="http://jakebelder.com/communal-nature-in-gods-design">the communal nature that we were designed for</a>.</p>
<p>Matt concludes with observing how perplexing it is that our "churches live and function in mirror image to our wider consumer culture and how often that hinders ministry. <em>Is becoming local again the radical first step in making a break from the culture and redefining ourselves in light of Christ&rsquo;s call?...</em>If churches really want to teach vocation, how better than to live it out by become truly local congregations." Again, I think he makes an excellent point.</p>

As I mentioned, I have come back to this theme several times in the past couple of months (see <a href="http://jakebelder.com/serving-the-neighborhood">here</a>, and <a href="http://jakebelder.com/looking-for-the-local-church">here</a>, for example), and I realize that there are barriers to constructing a purely local church community, most notably the question of theological cohesiveness. But I think Matt provides a lot of material to think about and discuss here. So let us do so. What do you think? What is helpful in what Matt is suggesting; what is not? What would you add (or subtract) to the notion of the local church?
