---
layout: post
title: 'History, tradition, conviction: Is there a tension?'
date: 24 September 2008 07:46
tags:
- history
- church
- church-history
- community
- scripture
---
<p>Studying <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_history">the history of the Church</a> is one of my passions, and in the past year I have been able to engage in that study to a fairly great extent. I have written here before of <a href="http://jakebelder.com/know-where-youre-coming-from">the importance of knowing the history of the Church</a> because it is our shared history as the body of Christ and you cannot truly know who you are unless you know where you come from.</p>
<p>However, studying this history often causes me to struggle a bit with where I find myself in the Church. <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calvinism">The tradition I align myself with</a> has a comparatively short history, only being established at the high point of the <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protestant_Reformation">Protestant Reformation</a>. Of course, this tradition, like all others, claims that it although it came to full expression at the time of the Reformation and onwards, it upholds the purity and fullness of what the Bible teaches and so it ties its history right back to Christ. There is, then, the implicit claim that a lot of thinkers and theologians in the history of the Church had things wrong. That can be tough to wrestle with.</p>
<p><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J._N._D._Kelly">J.N.D. Kelly</a>, in his book, <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Early-Christian-Doctrines-J-Kelly/dp/0826452523/ref=pd_bbs_sr_1?ie=UTF8&amp;s=books&amp;qid=1221615416&amp;sr=8-1"><em>Early Christian Doctrines</em></a>, discusses the development of the notion of the apostolic tradition in the first few centuries of the Church. In its original usage, "tradition" referred to the "the Church's continuous tradition of teaching, and more concretely [that found] in the Holy Scriptures...by tradition the fathers usually mean doctrine which the Lord or His apostles committed to the Church, irrespective of whether it was handed down orally or in documents" (30). <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Athanasius">Athanasius</a>, one of the church fathers, described it as "the actual original tradition, teaching and faith of the Catholic Church, which the Lord bestowed, the apostles proclaimed and the fathers safeguarded." (Ad Serap. I, 28).</p>
<p>In the very early stages of the Church, that tradition could be handed down with the assurance that it maintained its orthodoxy. In fact, many of the earliest leaders of the Church knew the apostles directly. Because of this close connection, it was believed that the Church was the sole depository of that tradition, and that it was charged with the responsibility of safeguarding it. This led to the confession that later became so pronounced in the medieval church: <em><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extra_Ecclesiam_nulla_salus">Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus</a></em> ("Outside the church, there is no salvation"). If your belief system did not coincide with the teaching of the apostolic tradition, you were accused of heterodoxy.</p>
<p>However, the rapid growth of the Church and its increasing diversity meant that the understanding of that tradition was going to change. The host of theological issues and concepts we are familiar with today were entirely foreign to the early Church, but they started to arise in the third and fourth centuries. At that point, the leaders of the Church had an increasingly larger chronological distance from the original apostles, and thus the tradition which they prized so highly had begun to become distorted. Time has a tendency to do that to ideas, concepts, and beliefs. This distortion, combined with the increasing theological study being done, led to a great deal of heresy and doctrinal conflict in the Church, eventually dealt with and resolved by <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_seven_Ecumenical_Councils">the early ecumenical councils</a>.</p>
<p>Now, I am not going to trace a detailed history of the Church here, but my point is that as the idea of tradition expanded and developed, its orthodoxy and faithfulness to Scripture began to wane. History cannot keep silent about the great deal of corruption that was characteristic of the medieval period. And while the churches spawned by the Reformation claimed to recover pure, biblical teaching--in essence, the original teaching of the apostles--the splintering and dividing of the Protestant Church soon afterward led to understandable skepticism about the integrity of that claim. Still now, it is most certainly not good for the witness of the Church in the world. I think this is one of the reasons that the Eastern Orthodox seem to maintain the idea that history and theological development is almost regressive. I am not sure they would use that terminology, but the point is that their ultimate authority lies in the early apostolic tradition, a claim which they make with great conviction. They often attribute less authority to subsequent theological developments.</p>
<p>In an earlier post, I spoke of how when we look at the broad span of the Church's history, there are a lot of negatives and low points, but we also see the faithfulness of <a href="http://jakebelder.com/i-will-build-my-church-0">God's promise that He would preserve His Church</a>. But there is a tension here too. Everyone claims to be the faithful heir to that promise. Everyone claims to maintain the purity of biblical truth. Everyone claims that their tradition has interpreted Scripture correctly. Everyone claims they are the remnant of the true Church that God has preserved.</p>
<p>Herein lies my occasional struggle. It has been a blessing for me to be engaged in a lot of theological study over the years, and I hold to a set of beliefs with the conviction that they are biblically sound. I confess them to be truth. But so do many others who see things in often radically different ways. Still, I know that I cannot live in a shady sort of skepticism or the gray areas of uncertainty. It would be impossible to even have discussion about the nature of Christianity and the Church if we did not have convictions. I know that the truthfulness of a belief cannot be tested solely by whether or not the same belief has been confessed historically. Even though some of the things I believe may not coincide with theological understandings in history, that does not automatically negate the truth of my convictions. But at the same time, historical agreement does carry <span style="font-style: italic;">some</span> weight, and to know that what I believe has been maintained as truth throughout history is an attractive idea.</p>
<p>Yet, the Bible also speaks of keeping our conscience clear, and I think that plays a part here. Remaining firm in my convictions is a matter of conscience. To believe them with any less conviction than I do now would certainly cause unrest in my conscience, unless I were to be persuaded that another understanding of what is revealed in Scripture is more faithful. The point is that I am obligated to continually study the Word of God to discover the truth contained in that Word, and I am also obligated then to <span style="font-style: italic;">believe </span>the truth I discover in the Word, regardless of whether or not historical theological traditions have held to that conviction as well. However, this is not a task we are required (or enabled) <a href="http://jakebelder.com/the-lone-ranger-and-the-community-of-the-fait">to do solely on our own</a>, but in community. Further, I want to stress the point that we should not start from scratch and assume that all historical understanding of Scripture is invalid. Instead, we must know that history and use earlier beliefs and interpretations to aid us in our study of Scripture.</p>

Perhaps this is a little scattered and lacking in coherence, but I would like to know what you think. How do you deal with this? If your understandings do not square with the teachings of the Church historically, does this trouble you?
