---
layout: post
title: Murray on glorification, part 2
date: 09 December 2009 11:42
tags:
- john-murray
- redemption
- theology
---
<p>The attitude that the physical or material is<span style="font-style: italic;"> </span>somehow "bad" or "evil" and will eventually be destroyed is a common one, even among Christians, as I've been discussing here recently. Perceptions like this lead to the belief that the creation will one day be destroyed altogether in favour of something spiritual and otherworldly.<br /><br />Because our bodies are physical, this also leads to what is essentially a glorying in death. To be sure, we mourn the loss of our loved ones, but we celebrate the fact that they have passed through this earth and reached their destination. They have reached their goal. Certainly, there are benefits that the believer receives in death, but this is not the end of the story. I will leave it to <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Murray_%28theologian%29">John Murray</a>, again from the final chapter of his book, <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Redemption-Accomplished-Applied-John-Murray/dp/0802811434/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&amp;s=books&amp;qid=1260204947&amp;sr=8-1"><span style="font-style: italic;">Redemption Accomplished and Applied</span></a>, to offer the critique and biblical corrective to this error. An extended quote, once more:</p>
<blockquote>
Glorification does not refer to the blessedness upon which the spirits of believers enter at death. It is true that then the saints, as respects their disembodied spirits, are made perfect in holiness and pass immediately into the presence of Christ...Yet, however glorious is the transformation of the people of God at death and however much they may be disposed to say with the apostle that to depart and to be with Christ is far better (cf. Phil. 1:23), this is not their glorification. It is not the goal of the believer's hope and expectation. The redemption which Christ has secured for his people is redemption not only from sin but also from all its consequences. Death is the wages of sin and the death of believers does not deliver them from death. The last enemy, death, has not yet been destroyed; it has not yet been swallowed up in victory. Hence glorification has in view the destruction of death itself. It is to dishonour Christ and to undermine the nature of the Christian hope to substitute the blessedness upon which believers enter at death for the glory that is to be revealed when "this corruptible will put on incorruption and this mortal will put on immortality" (1 Cor. 15:54). Preoccupation with the event of death indicates a deflection of faith, of love, and of hope. We who have the firstfruits of the Spirit 'groan within ourselves,' the apostle reminds us, 'waiting for the adoption, the redemption of our body' (Rom. 8:23). That is the glorification. It is the complete and final redemption of the whole person when in the integrity of body and spirit the people of God will be conformed to the image of the risen, exalted, and glorified Redeemer, when the very body of their humiliation will be conformed to the body of Christ's glory (cf. Phil. 3:21).  God is not the God of the dead but of the living and therefore nothing short of resurrection to the full enjoyment of God can constitute the glory to which the living God will lead his redeemed.
</blockquote>

Now <span style="font-style: italic;">that</span> is hope!
