---
layout: post
title: Murray on glorification, part 1
date: 07 December 2009 11:47
tags:
- john-murray
- redemption
- theology
---
<p>While the whole of <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Murray_%28theologian%29">John Murray's</a> <span>little book</span><span style="font-style: italic;">, <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Redemption-Accomplished-Applied-John-Murray/dp/0802811434/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&amp;s=books&amp;qid=1260204947&amp;sr=8-1">Redemption Accomplished and Applied</a></span><span>,</span><span style="font-style: italic;"> </span>could be considered a gold mine (I heard today that one of our professors, <a href="http://www.rts.edu/faculty/StaffDetails.aspx?id=288">Steve Childers</a>, calls it a "little stick of dynamite"), his final seven-page chapter on glorification is on its own worth the price of the book. There are two things from this chapter I want to discuss, which I will do in the reverse order of Murray's discussion, partly because some of my more recent posts (see <a href="http://www.jakebelder.com/2009/11/heaven-is-not-my-home.html">here</a> and <a href="http://www.jakebelder.com/2009/12/salvation-and-reconquest-of-creation.html">here</a>) have carried a theme that he addresses as well.<br /><br />The first, then, is the problem of not acknowledging the goodness and value of creation. Murray pulls no punches when he calls this a heresy. An extended quotation:</p>
<blockquote>
One of the heresies which has afflicted the Christian church and has been successful in polluting the stream of Christian thought from the first century to our era to the present is the heresy of regarding matter, that is, material substance, as the source of evil. It has appeared in numerous forms. The apostles had to combat it in their day and the evidence of this appears quite plainly in the New Testament, especially in the epistles. John, for example, had to combat it in the peculiarly aggravated form of denying the reality of Christ's body as one of flesh...<br /><br />

Another form in which this heresy appeared is to regard salvation as consisting of the emancipation of the soul or spirit of man from the impediments and entanglements of association with the body. Salvation and sanctification progress to the extent to which the immaterial soul overcomes the degrading influences emanating from the material and fleshly. This conception can be made to appear very beautiful and 'spiritual,' but it is just 'beautiful paganism.' It is a straight thrust at the biblical doctrine that God created man with body and soul and that he was very good. It is also aimed at the biblical doctrine of sin which teaches that sin has its origin and seat in the spirit of man, not in the material and fleshly.<br /><br />

This heresy has appeared in a very subtle form in connection with the subject of glorification. The direction it has taken in this case is to play on the chord of the immortality of the soul. This seems a very innocent and proper emphasis and, of course, there is some truth in the contention that the soul is immortal. But whenever the focus of interest and emphasis becomes the immortality of the soul, then there is a grave deflection from the biblical doctrine of immortal life and bliss. The biblical doctrine of 'immortality,' if we may use that term, is the doctrine of <span style="font-style: italic;">glorification</span>. And glorification is resurrection. Without resurrection of the body from the grave and the restoration of human nature to its completeness after the pattern of Christ's resurrection on the third day and according to the likeness of the glorified human nature in which he will appear on the clouds of heaven with great power and glory there is no glorification. It is not the vague sentimentality and idealism so characteristic of those whose interest is merely the immortality of the soul. Here we have the concreteness and realism of the Christian hope epitomized in the resurrection to life everlasting...<br /><br />

In like manner the Christian's hope is not indifferent to the material universe around us, the cosmos of God's creation. It was subjected to vanity not willingly; it was cursed for man's sin; it was marred by human apostasy. But it is going to be delivered from the bondage to corruption, and its deliverance will be coincident with the consummation of God's people's redemption. The two are not only coincident as events but they are correlative in hope. Glorification has cosmic purposes...(2 Pet. 3:13; 1 Cor. 15:24, 28).
</blockquote>
<p>Forceful as it may sound, that Murray calls this heresy is not an embellishment or exaggeration. He is calling it as it is. When a belief causes you to implicitly deny some of the fundamental doctrines of the Christian faith, it needs to be eradicated.</p>

Look for part two tomorrow.
