---
layout: post
title: Rethinking repackaging
date: 23 January 2009 06:08
tags:
- church
- ecclesiology
- ministry
- mission
---
<p>Reflecting some more on <a href="http://jakebelder.com/its-not-the-box-but-whats-in-the-box">our efforts to &ldquo;repackage&rdquo; the Church</a>, I was thinking the other day of why we are so intent on doing this.  Among other reasons, I am sure that one of the primary and most obvious reasons is that we are seeing a significant decline in people attending church in North America and we want to change that.</p>
<p>With no intent to deny that as an honorable objective, I do see some problems here. First, when we start talking about rethinking the way we do things, there seems to be a lot of finger-pointing.  Different groups criticize others for their failures and cast the blame on them for people walking out of churches without looking back.  The shared assumption is held that there are people, or various groups within the Church that are responsible for people exiting <span style="font-style: italic;">en masse</span>.</p>
<p>Again, maybe that is true, but I wonder why the first instinct is to presume that somewhere, somehow, someone has done something wrong.  Yes, God has entrusted the care of His Church to sinners, and yes, we will undoubtedly fail to some degree or another at that calling.  But there could be more to it.  There are numerous places in Scripture that speak of God hardening peoples&rsquo; hearts.  What is to say that this is not what He is doing here right now?  What is to say this is a time when He will not draw many to Himself?  It is hard to talk about that because we cannot know the mind or plan of God.  That would probably be why you don&rsquo;t hear a lot of conversation like this.  And it could be troublesome as well.  Thinking like that could potentially give way to an apathetic attitude that says we have a license to just let things be.</p>
<p>Another problem arises when everyone quickly begins to play the relevance card, rushing to abandon most of the way we have done or currently do things in favor of adopting practices that are &ldquo;relevant&rdquo; to culture.  Since that issue has been spoken of in many other places, I won&rsquo;t dwell on it.  For consideration, I just want to highlight something I once heard <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Driscoll">Mark Driscoll</a> say:  &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t need to <span style="font-style: italic;">make</span> the gospel relevant.  It already is.  Instead, we need to show <span style="font-style: italic;">how</span> the gospel is relevant to all of life.&rdquo;  That&rsquo;s an important distinction and an interesting thought.  <a href="http://partofthestory.com/on-mlk-and-the-thermostat-of-the-church">Mike Edwards recently posted</a> a quote from <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Luther_King,_Jr.">Martin Luther King, Jr.</a>, which contained a similar thought: &ldquo;the church [is] not merely a thermometer that [records] the ideas and principles of popular opinion; it [is] a thermostat that [transforms] the mores of society.&rdquo;</p>
<p>In addition to the problems I mentioned above, I also wonder if in our efforts to rethink the way we do things we end up placing far too much stress on our own ability to fix the perceived problems.  It is good that we continually think about our practices as the Church, but we need to be careful that our efforts to ensure we do things biblically are not eclipsed by efforts to do things that draw people in.  Glory must always first and foremost be given to God.  Everything else is secondary.</p>
<p>Finally, I think it is important that when we focus on growth, we make sure that it is a holistic growth which very intently disciples and nurtures those who come into the fold.  Whatever programs, methods, or strategies we want to employ need to go beyond just how we can bring people into the churches. I am not affiliated with the <a href="http://www.acts29network.org/">Acts 29 Network</a>, but I really like that their <a href="http://www.acts29network.org/acts-29-blog/mission--vision-of-acts-29-network/">mission statement</a> is very pointed about regeneration and the need to disciple new believers as they are added.</p>

Please understand that I'm only vocalizing a few scattered thoughts and just thinking a few things through.  I am not attempting to say anything definitive here nor is it my intent to discredit the great variety of things that have been done by leaders within the Church to carry out her mission .  To be a leader requires a certain degree of vision and creativity, and I praise God for those whom He has raised up who have those gifts. My concern here is only that we make sure the things that we do are rooted in the right motives and aiming to fulfill the right ends.  What do you think?
