---
layout: post
title: Don't do away with the past
date: 12 June 2009 06:52
tags:
- church
- church-history
- theology
- ecclesiology
---
Amidst the various characterizations of evangelicals, one that always stands out in my mind as particularly significant is the lack of historical consciousness.  Discontinuity and indifference with the past seems to raise little concern, and the result is most clearly seen in weak ecclesiologies and eclectic theologies.  The only historical period that evangelicals might find some continuity with is that of the early church; however, it should be noted that this is often premised on a very deficient and uninformed view of the ancient church.

A church culture full of historical amnesiacs is cause for deep concern, and contributes in large part to my desire to study and teach history and historical theology.  I was pleased the other day to come across an insightful statement in the introductory portion of a collection of essays edited by <a href="http://www.wts.edu/faculty/profile.html?id=12">Carl R. Trueman</a> and <a href="http://www.wscal.edu/faculty/bios/clark.php">R. Scott Clark</a> entitled, <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Protestant-Scholasticism-Reassessment-Studies-Christian/dp/0853648530"><span style="font-style: italic;">Protestant Scholasticism: Essays in Reassessment</span></a>, which I've been working through in preparation for a class on post-Reformation theology I'll be auditing next week.  In their words:

<blockquote>
Historical theology is concerned to locate theologians and theologies within their particular contexts, and in this task history in the more general sense serves primarily to illumine theology, in much the same way that background studies illumine one's interpretation of any historical text.  To use the language of modern hermeneutical theory, history provides the means for understanding the horizons of our subjects, points us to which questions can legitimately be asked, and reveals which questions, through their anachronistic presuppositions, are irrelevant.  When pursued in this way, using a framework of interpretation sensitive to the critical questions of historical method, historical theology is free to perform an extraordinarily important function in the academy and the church: it relieves the individual of today of the burden of reinventing Christianity of the past in his or her own image; and it also prevents unhistorical romanticism about earlier epochs in the history of the church, a problem prevalent both in Barthian and, more especially, conservative pietistic traditions.  Careful, thoughtful historical investigation reveals that the church has always been more or less imperfect, and that there have been no golden ages, patristic, medieval, or Reformation, despite what conservatives and liberals have asserted to the contrary.
</blockquote>

These observations, in my estimation, get to the heart of the evangelical problem.  Theological conversation is dominated by terminology expressing the desire for things that are new.  Everything needs to be "rethought" and "reworked" if it is to have any credence today; or, in the case of those who attempt to look back to the New Testament church, "reclaimed" and "rediscovered."  To be sure, careful reflection on our theology is crucial, and that requires not that we approach theology with a sort of <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tabula_rasa"><span style="font-style: italic;">tabula rasa</span></a>, but with an earnest effort to critically engage the past recognizing the communal nature of theology, one that spans the centuries.

Now, granted, there are significant historiographical questions to address here and to merely state that evangelicals lack historical consciousness without accounting for the various reasons for this is to fall into exactly the same error.  Evangelicals, like any other Westerners,  are historically-conditioned.  We can never understand the various nuances of a certain culture without recognizing how that culture's history has shaped it.  For the Western world, as <a href="http://www.religion.utoronto.ca/people/faculty/expanded/mcintire.htm">C. T. McIntire</a> and Ronald A. Wells state in the introduction to their book, <a href="http://www.amazon.com/History-Historical-Understanding-C-McIntire/dp/0802800300/ref=sr_1_6?ie=UTF8&amp;s=books&amp;qid=1244779613&amp;sr=8-6"><span style="font-style: italic;">History and Historical Understanding</span></a>,

<blockquote>
the twentieth century has been an unnerving one...If we accept with <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E._H._Carr">E. H. Carr</a> that history is a dialogue between present and past, the present from which we reflect on the past fills us with disquietude.  The main difference between our perception of the relationship between present and past and that of earlier [perceptions] is that we have lost that most elementary, yet crucial, support of their historiography&mdash;the view of history as progress.  Moreover, we have no broad agreement on any comparable or more adequate view of history to put in its place.  It would seem that the events of our century warrant belief not in progress but in the possibility of endless crisis.
</blockquote>

This reality undoubtedly contributes to the disconnect of modern evangelicalism to the past.  What stands out so prominently in a survey of the history of the church is unfortunate events and circumstances like the abuse of power by church leaders, the terrible wars of religion, the fragmentation of the church, and the bitter and endless disputes over seemingly insignificant doctrinal points and emphases.  Little wonder, then, that with such an ugly and marred history the modern church wants little to do with the past.

Still, there is no excuse for turning a blind eye to history.  Trueman and Clark's point that we don't need to bear the burden of reinventing Christianity and theology should come as a welcome breath of fresh air.  In its attempts to do theology apart from the wisdom of the past, evangelicalism, despite illusions to the contrary, does not free itself from the perceived shackles of history and tradition.  Instead, it tacitly enslaves itself to the short-sightedness of ahistorical autonomy.  Theology is never done in a vacuum; to live as such is simply arrogant, even idolatrous.

It remains the more difficult yet necessary challenge to view history through the perspective of the covenant and the Kingdom&mdash;to see God actively at work in history to faithfully build His church and gather His people and His creation together under His rule in order to bless them and redeem them.   The work of the Christian historian and historical theologian centers on bringing this reality to light and helping the people of the church see themselves in the context of a story that encompasses all of history and time.  We cannot (and should not) avoid the fact that each period of history and historical theology has its imperfections.  The solution, though, is not to do away with the past but to engage in careful and honest reflection on what history teaches us.
