---
layout: post
title: Baptism and the covenant
date: 05 March 2010 08:44
tags:
- baptism
- covenant
- theology
- herman-bavinck
- sacraments
---
<p><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Driscoll">Mark Driscoll</a> apparently made a comment once something to the effect of it being ridiculous that people could sprinkle babies with a few drops of water and call it baptism. Let me make clear, though, that I can't verify he actually said that, and so by no means claim that he did&mdash;indeed, it would surprise me; I understand that the <a href="http://www.acts29network.org">Acts 29 Network</a> includes both paedo- and credo-baptist churches&mdash;but I know these sentiments exist (if you'd like to read something delightfully inflammatory, <a href="http://adrianwarnock.com/2008/10/spurgoen-infant-baptism-abomination/">read this</a> from <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Spurgeon" target="_blank">Spurgeon</a> on the "abomination" of infant baptism).</p>
<p>I grew up in paedo-baptist churches, and have long held to the conviction that infants should be baptized, although there was a period when I wrestled quite extensively with the question of who are to be the subjects of baptism. In the last few years, however, I have found my conviction that the infants of believers must be baptized strengthened, especially in light of the covenant. In volume four of his <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Reformed-Dogmatics-Spirit-Church-Creation/dp/0801026571/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&amp;s=books&amp;qid=1267622521&amp;sr=8-4"><em>Reformed Dogmatics</em></a> (yes, this will be an oft-quoted text on this blog), <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herman_Bavinck">Herman Bavinck</a> makes a number of arguments in favour of the baptism of children. I find his discussion of the relationship between baptism and the covenant particularly important:</p>
<blockquote>
The covenant of grace established with Israel, though it changed in dispensation, remained the same in essence. The church (ἐ&kappa;&kappa;&lambda;&eta;&sigma;ί&alpha;, <em>ekklēsia</em>) has replaced the Israel of the Old Testament. It is now the people of God, and God is its God and Father (Matt. 1:21; Luke 1:17; Acts 3:25; Rom. 9:25-26; 11:16-21; 2 Cor. 6:16-18; Gal. 3:14-29; Eph. 2:12-13; Titus 2:14; Heb. 8:8-10; 1 Pet. 2:9; Rev. 21:3). As was the case in the Old Testament, so now too the children of believers are included among the people of God. The church of the New Testament, after all, is not a collection of individuals, but an organism, a body, a temple, and as such, as a people, it took the place of Israel. As wild olive shoots&mdash;since some of the branches of the old olive tree have been broken off&mdash;they have been grafted onto the trunk of the same olive tree and so share in the nourishing sap from its root (Rom. 11:16-17). Hence at times entire households converted to Christianity. The household itself is an institution of God, an organic whole, which shares in a common blessing or a common curse...[Peter] says that the promise of the old covenant that God would be the God of believers and their children passed into the dispensation of the New Testament (Acts 2:39) [528-529].
</blockquote>
Bavinck goes on to note that children are sanctified by virtue of their parents, citing Paul's discussion of believing and unbelieving spouses in 1 Corinthians 7:14ff. He observes that when Paul speaks about the holiness children receive from a believing parent it is not a subjective and internal holiness, but a "theocratic kind of holiness." As such,</p>
<blockquote>
it teaches that the whole family is regarded in light of the confession of the believing spouse. The believer has the calling to serve the Lord not only for oneself but with all that belongs to oneself and with one's entire family. For that reason the children of believers are admonished by the apostles as Christian children in the Lord (Acts 26:22; Eph. 6:1; Col. 3:20; 2 Tim. 3:15; 1 John 2:13)...Scripture knows nothing of a neutral upbringing that seeks to have the children make a completely free and independent choice at a more advanced age. The children of believers are...children of the covenant and are holy, not by nature (Job 14:4; Ps. 51:5; John 3:6; Eph. 2:3) but by virtue of the covenant...The basis for baptism is not the assumption that someone is regenerate, nor even that [there is] regeneration itself, but only the covenant of God (529-531).
</blockquote>
It is a significant point, I think, that in the New Testament we always see a heightening in the fulfillment of something from the Old Testament. That is the case with typology, for instance, and so it is the case with the covenant. The promises of the covenant are fulfilled in a much greater way in the New Testament. To restrict the promises of the covenant, then, to those who are able to make a verbal profession of faith, seems to be a <em>regression</em> and not a heightened fulfillment. In the Old Testament, if the promises of the covenant were to "you and your seed," how much more should they be in the New Testament and subsequent ages! Additionally, one's incorporation into the covenant is never an autonomous act, but always and only an act of God bringing that person into the covenant family.</span></span></p>

Of course, this by no means exhausts the case for infant baptism, but for me it is the most powerful argument in favour of it. Thoughts?
