---
layout: post
title: Baxter rails against the disunity of the church
date: 29 August 2010 01:03
tags:
- church
- richard-baxter
- unity
---
<p><a href="http://jakebelder.com/tear-down-the-walls-0">Several times</a> here I have spoken of <a href="http://jakebelder.com/making-the-organic-unity-of-the-church-a-real">the need for unity</a> in the church. It is something so frequently spoken of, but so rarely acted upon. <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Baxter">Richard Baxter</a>, in <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Reformed-Pastor-Richard-Baxter/dp/0851511910/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&amp;ie=UTF8&amp;qid=1279493811&amp;sr=1-1"><em>The Reformed Pastor</em></a>,  makes mention of this need for unity as well. Below, at length, is a  forceful critique of those who actively sow disunity in the church:</p>
<blockquote>
Of  the multitude that say they are of the catholic Church, it is rare to  meet with men of a catholic spirit. Men have not a universal  consideration of, and respect to, the whole Church, but look upon their  own party as it it were the whole. If there be some called Lutherans,  some Calvinists, some subordinate divisions among these, and so of other  parties among us, most of them will pray hard for the prosperity of  their party, and rejoice and give thanks when it goes well with them;  but if any other party suffer, they little regard it, as if it were no  loss at all to the Church. If it be the smallest parcel that possesseth  not many nations, no, nor cities on earth, they are ready to carry it,  as if they were the whole Church, and as if it went well with the Church  when it goes well with them. We cry down the Pope as Antichrist, for  including the Church in the Romish pale, and no doubt but it is  abominable schism: but, alas! how many do imitate them too far, while  they reprove them! And as the Papists foist the word <em>Roman</em> into  their creed, and turn the catholic Church into the Roman Catholic  church, as if there were no other catholics, and the Church were of no  larger extent, so is it with many others as to their several parties.  Some will have it to be the Lutheran catholic church, and some the  Reformed catholic church; some the Anabaptist catholic church, and so of  some others. And if they differ not among themselves, they are little  troubled at differing from others, though it be from almost all the  Christian world. The peace of their party they take for the peace of the  Church. No wonder, therefore, if they carry it no further.<br><br>

How  rare it is to meet with a man that smarteth or bleedeth with the  Church's wounds, or sensibly taketh them to heart as his own, or that  ever had solicitous thoughts of a cure! No; but almost every party  thinks that the happiness of the rest consisteth in turning to them; and  because they be not of their mind, they cry, Down with them! and are  glad to hear of their fall, as thinking that is the way to the Church's  rising, that is, their own. How few are there who understand that true  state of controversies between the several parties; or that ever well  discerned how many of them are but verbal, and how many are real! And if  those that understand it do, in order to right information and  accomodation, disclose it to others, it is taken as an extenuation of  their error, and as a carnal compliance with them in their sin. Few men  grow zealous for peace till they grow old, or have much experience of  men's spirits and principles, and see better the true state of the  Church, and the several differences, than they did before...<br><br>

Nay,  commonly it bringeth a man under suspicion either of favouring some  heresy or abating his zeal, if he do but attempt a pacificatory work. As  if there were no zeal necessary for the great fundamental verities of  the Church's unity and peace, but only for parties, and some particular  truths.<br><br>

And a great  advantage the devil hath got this way, by employing his own agents...by  which means the motion for peace, is presently under suspicion of being  one that hath need of it for an indulgence to his own errors. (157-159)</span></p>
</blockquote>

Baxter continues to go for several more pages about this. We cannot deny how terribly we have failed in this matter. <em>Father, Son, and Holy Spirit have mercy on us, that we may be one as you are one.</em>
