---
layout: post
title: The power of God and the life of the church
date: 02 July 2010 05:47
tags:
- church
- ecclesiology
- ministry
- mission
- pca
---
<p>The denomination I am currently affiliated with, the <a href="http://www.pcanet.org">Presbyterian Church in America</a>, has been holding its annual <a href="http://pcaac.org/2010GeneralAssembly/2010GeneralAssembly.htm">General Assembly</a> this week in Nashville. This is always an important time for the denomination, as the leaders of our churches gather together to discuss the future of the denomination and how the churches can continue to remain committed to the shared mission of being "faithful to the Scriptures, true to the Reformed faith, and obedient to the Great Commission."</p>
<p>Due to my schedule, I haven't been able to follow the assembly as closely this year as I was last year, but I tuned in for a little while last night. As they were deliberating on different matters, I was reminded of a something I read in <a href="http://www.amazon.com/House-Where-God-Lives-Doctrine/dp/0802845827/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&amp;s=books&amp;qid=1270499593&amp;sr=8-1"><em>The House Where God Lives</em></a>, a book on ecclesiology by Canadian theologian, <a href="http://www.huronuc.ca/faculty_of_theology/faculty_members/">Gary Badcock</a>, published toward the end of last year. What he says here is worth thinking about as meetings like the PCA's General Assembly happen. Consider this:</p>
<blockquote>
'I believe in the church.' In this  confession of Christian faith there are, ultimately, grounds for hope.  The church is what it is not because of some program, system of thought,  or pattern of practice. It is what it is, in the final analysis,  because God graciously chooses to deal with us as sinful creatures. As a  result, the church is more than a hollow shell in which humans think  theological thoughts, dream religious and moral dreams, and do good  deeds. Hence neither the existence nor the renewal of the church is  strictly <em>our</em> task; this is just as well, because on account of  our half-formed thinking, our sloth, and our disobedience, the church in  itself is bound to be a disappointment. God is able to renew the  church, but this is entirely despite the fact of its limitations and  sinfulness, despite its wrong-headedness and outright lies at times,  rather than because of any inherent holiness or wisdom it possesses.  Therefore, the renewal of the church does not even depend on an  ecclesiology; in the end, even the theologian who labors to say as much  must fall silent, give thanks, and pray.<br><br>

What is absolutely required here is  neither a theology nor a strategy but what [we may call] 'God's  lightning,' the free action of God that strikes unexpectedly, in ways  that surpass what we can ask and in the end is totally independent of  our answers or our imaginings. For the renewal of the church takes place  as God reaches out in power, truth, and love by his Word and Spirit, so  that God himself comes to us &ndash; God, the unutterable one who transcends  all our theological systems and stratagems alike, the one who judges all  things and who makes all things new. The renewal of the church, though a  goal toward which we can surely work and concerning which we can think,  is ultimately something for which we must pray and wait. This is what I  intend when I speak of the church as 'the house where God lives,' that  is, affirming what is sufficient for our needs in this age and in all  ages, and affirming what is finally the one great theme of ecclesiology  as a question of Christian <em>doctrine</em> (337).
</blockquote>
<p>By no means, of course, is this a call for us to sit idly by and wait for God to work. Indeed, the work of meetings such as General Assembly is very important for the life of the church. But what Badcock wants us to realize here is that while our work is important, in the end it is nothing if God is not in it. When we stop and think about it this is perhaps an obvious truth, but in our day to day work it is easy to let something so simple &ndash; despite it being so crucial  &ndash; slip from our minds.</p>

To that end, let us continually be in prayer for the Spirit to be at work in our churches bringing life and renewal as we strive to be faithful to the one who called us, and as we labor in our mission to proclaim the gospel of Jesus Christ. To him be the glory forever.
