---
layout: post
title: Some thoughts on Liam Goligher's comments on preaching in the UK and the US
date: 2013-05-31 15:34
tags:
- preaching
- liam-goligher
- america
- united-kingdom
- church
---
This video, featuring [Liam Goligher]( http://www.tenth.org/index.php?id=110), pastor of Tenth Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia, has been making the rounds in the past couple of days, particularly amongst my friends here in the UK (I first saw it on [Anthony Smith’s blog](http://www.anthonysmith.me.uk/2013/05/29/liam-goligher-on-the-state-of-preaching-in-the-uk/)). Goligher offers his evaluation of the differences between preaching in the UK and in America:

<iframe width="640" height="360" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/aEjL-UneWQU?rel=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe><br>

His comments are interesting, as is clear from the number of times people have been posting and sharing the video. As someone who has spent time in both contexts, I wanted to make a few observations from my own experience, and respond to some of Goligher’s assertions.

The major point he makes is that preaching in the UK has been undermined by a number of things, to the point where people no longer see it as anything particularly significant. In contrast, he notes that in his experience, American Christians still view preaching as a divine act, and that when they gather on Sunday to worship, ‘they’re here to hear from the throne’.

Goligher is older than I am, and undoubtedly has more experience in a greater number of churches in both the British and American contexts, but I’m not convinced that his generalisations are necessarily true. In the first place, my own experience of the American church scene leads me to a different conclusion about the 'appetite' for preaching there. To be sure, there are contexts in which Goligher's remarks will be true, but by and large, I think a survey of the evangelical world in the US would yield different results. In many evangelical churches across America, you would find a general lack of understanding not only in regards to what preaching *is*, but also in what it is meant to accomplish. You only need to look at some of the critiques levelled at the preaching in American evangelical churches: sermons are occasionally described as something like baptised self-help seminars, or as a product of the [moralistic, therapeutic deism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moralistic_therapeutic_deism) that characterises parts of evangelicalism. At the risk of being a bit harsh, I would also suggest that even the posture of evangelicals during a Sunday service is indicative of the state of preaching in the US. On the whole, you would be hard-pressed to find people sitting with their Bibles open, taking notes, or even demonstrating active listening (unless the pastor is given to delivering a significant number of jokes during the course of his sermon).

Second, my experience of preaching in the UK has clearly been far more positive than Goligher's. I have the blessing and privilege of serving a church where people do come each week not to hear me, or any of our other ministers, but to hear God speaking through his messengers. They come humbly before Scripture, with a desire to hear and submit to what it says. There is a hunger and a desire to be fed and to be changed and to yield to its authority, and a recognition that in doing so, we grow in faith and love for God. This was one of the things I was so encouraged by when we first moved to the UK, and which continues to make it an absolute joy to minister here. That being said, my experience of preaching in churches in the UK is quite limited, and perhaps my observations would more closely reflect Goligher's if I had the opportunity to visit more churches around the country.

Experiential observations aside, I want to make some additional comments. In Goligher’s own circles in America, I would concede that he is partly right to say that there is a good appetite there for preaching. However, I am slightly cynical about this – I do not think that this is solely an appetite for *preaching*. The American church context is noted for its penchant for celebrity, and the appetite for preaching is, I think, closely wedded to the appetite for *celebrity*. Goligher himself would not be considered a big celebrity in America, at least not to the degree men like [Piper](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Piper_%28theologian%29) and [Driscoll](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Driscoll_%28pastor%29) are (although he is closely associated with groups like The Gospel Coalition, and counts some of those celebrities as colleagues), but he does pastor a well-known church which draws a large crowd each week. Here is where my cynicism kicks in a little bit, because while those crowds that come week by week appear to come eager to listen to preaching (and I am sure for many of them that is the sole motivation!), there are certainly a good number who also come just to hear the celebrity preacher. Even though it would perhaps be less accurate to say this of Goligher's church, it is certainly true of many of the churches of those he considers colleagues.

I have written before about [how incredibly damaging this celebrity culture is to the ministry of the local church](http://blog.jakebelder.com/post/how-celebrity-culture-destroys-the-ministry-of-the-local-church), and unfortunately its prevalence only continues to grow. While I would like to say that Goligher is right about the appetite for preaching in America, I cannot help but think that it is not as clear cut as he suggests. When we lived in Florida, I heard a number of times of people who would drive over 300 miles from southern Georgia to hear [R.C. Sproul](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R._C._Sproul) preach on a Sunday morning. It can't help but be noted that while men like this draw huge crowds, other ministers, who preach just as well and say many of the same things – and in fact probably preach better [because they know their parishioners personally](http://blog.jakebelder.com/post/preaching-is-best-done-by-pastors) – struggle week by week with yawning, indifferent parishioners. For many evangelicals, it is really only the celebrities who can deliver amazing insights into a text, and who *really* know what the Bible says.

These are, of course, sweeping generalisations, and perhaps somewhat unfair. I certainly want to affirm that, despite my criticism of certain features of American Christianity, there is much good in it as well, and much to learn from. So, to avoid making any more (inflammatory?) remarks, let me briefly make a comment on Goligher’s observation about a lack of depth in preaching in the UK. He remarks that this lack of depth is owing to a suspicion of systematic theology. My own experience again suggests that this is a generalisation which is not entirely true, but I certainly would concur that evangelicalism in the UK is weak when it comes to systematic theology, and that this does have an impact on preaching and ministry to some degree. I find Goligher's suggestion that sermons in the UK are often more like 'Bible talks' interesting, because the subsequent comments he makes about this would suggest a preference for something more akin to a systematic theology lecture. While I know he would not say this, it is worth noting in passing that in some parts of the Presbyterian world Goligher inhabits, this would not always be an inaccurate description of what comes from the pulpit.

In the end, I have to wonder why Goligher didn't stay in the UK if he thinks there is so much work to be done on the preaching here. This aside, I am not convinced his remarks are particularly true, or helpful. I think he is too positive about the American context, and to negative about the British. But I am open to correction, and perhaps more time spent in the British context will alter my perspective. Still, we are always told to avoid generalisations, and that would be a wise rule to apply to this discussion as well. Goligher is speaking from his own experiences, and his evaluations should be understood as such, as should mine. Ultimately, this is something that really needs to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

But whatever the case, preaching is of huge importance for the life of the church, and we ought to devote every effort to ensuring both pastors and parishioners treat it as such. The Word of God is life-giving, and our life as the church depends on hearing, believing, and submitting to it. No one preaches perfectly, no one hears and obeys perfectly, and wherever improvements need to be made, we must have the humility to be willing to change.
